docs: add ZK chain tutorial (#36)
zkSync-Community-Hub/community-code: content/tutorials/custom-zk-chain/10.index.md

---
title: Getting Started with ZK Chains
description: Create and run your first ZK chain.
---

This tutorial shows you how to use the `zk_inception` CLI to run an Elastic Chain ecosystem and custom ZK chain locally:

- You'll set up a local **Elastic Chain ecosystem**
- You'll create a standard **ZK chain** and deploy a smart contract to it
- You'll create a second ZK chain that uses a **custom  ERC20 base token**

## Prerequisites

- Make sure your machine satisfies the [system
  requirements](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-compiler-solidity/tree/main#system-requirements).
- If you aren't already familiar with deploying smart contracts on ZKsync Era, please  refer to the first section of the [quickstart tutorial](https://docs.zksync.io/build/start-coding/quick-start/deploy-your-first-contract).

> - For background on the Elastic Chain or ZK chains, read the [ZK Chains](https://docs.zksync.io/zk-stack/concepts/zk-chains) section in our docs.

Reviewer: I know the page linked has the title as "ZK Chains" with C-capital, but I'll be going through and updating the titles to better match the guidelines we follow.

```suggestion
- For background on the Elastic Chain or ZK chains, read the [ZK chains](https://docs.zksync.io/zk-stack/concepts/zk-chains) section in our docs.
```

2. A chain deployed within the ecosystem

To setup both of these components, can use the `zk_inception` CLI.
You can use `cargo` to install the CLI with the command below:

```bash
cargo install --git https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/ --locked zk_inception --force
```

Once you have that installed, the first step is to create a new ecosystem with the `ecosystem create` command:

```bash
zk_inception ecosystem create
```

::callout{icon="i-heroicons-light-bulb"}
Make sure to have Docker open.
::

You will be prompted with a series of options to customize your ecosystem and generate a new chain within the ecosystem.
For this tutorial, use the options shown below:

```bash
$ zk_inception ecosystem create

┌   ZKsync toolbox
│
◇  What do you want to name the ecosystem?
│  my_elastic_chain
│
◇  Select the origin of zksync-era repository
│  Clone for me (recommended)
│
◇  Select the L1 network
│  Localhost
│
◇  What do you want to name the chain?
│  zk_chain_1
│
◇  Whats the chain id?
│  271
│
◇  Select how do you want to create the wallet
│  Localhost
│
◇  Select the prover mode
│  NoProofs
│
◇  Select the commit data generator mode
│  Rollup
│
◇  Select the base token to use

> │  Eth

Author: you select from two options here instead of writing, and this is just how it's shown

│
◇  Do you want to start containers after creating the ecosystem?
│  Yes
```

By running this command and selecting these options, you just:

- Created a new ecosystem called `my_elastic_chain`, which can contain many chains.
- Cloned the `zksync-era` repository inside the `my_elastic_chain` folder.
- Chose to use a local network to act as the L1.

> This means we'll have to run a local reth node as well (don't worry, we've setup everything you need for this too!).

Author: it does it automatically - as long as your other node is running on a different port it shouldn't interfere

1. `general.yaml`: general configurations.
1. `genesis.yaml`: chain specific configurations with parameters that were used during genesis.
1. `secrets.yaml`: secrets that are individual for every chain.
1. `wallets.yaml`: all wallets that you are using for this chain.

::callout{icon="i-heroicons-light-bulb"}
Never commit your private keys or sensitive secrets to a public repository!
::

### Starting the chain server

The last step here is to start a server for `zk_chain_1`:

```bash
zk_inception server
```

With this, your L1 chain should be running at port `8545`, and the `zk_chain_1` node should be running at port `3050`.

## Funding a wallet on your chain

Because you chose to use a local reth node for your L1 and selected ETH as the base asset,
you have access to several rich wallets on the L1 that you can use to bridge ETH to `zk_chain_1`.

Open a new terminal and run the command below to bridge some ETH to `zk_chain_1` using the `zksync-cli`:

```bash
npx zksync-cli bridge deposit --rpc=http://localhost:3050 --l1-rpc=http://localhost:8545
```

For testing purposes, we'll use one of the rich wallets as both the sender and recipient:

```shell
? Amount to deposit 10

> ? Private key of the sender 0x7726827caac94a7f9e1b160f7ea819f172f7b6f9d2a97f992c38edeab82d4110

Reviewer: ```suggestion
? Private key of the sender ***
```

Author: I would like to keep this in because otherwise you have to look it up every time. This is the same private key for the first rich wallet [in the docs](https://docs.zksync.io/build/test-and-debug/in-memory-node#pre-configured-rich-wallets) so I figured it's ok to publish here as well

? Recipient address on L2 0x36615Cf349d7F6344891B1e7CA7C72883F5dc049
```

To see that it worked, let's check the balance of that address on `zk_chain_1`:

```bash

> zksync-cli wallet balance --address 0x36615Cf349d7F6344891B1e7CA7C72883F5dc049 --rpc http://localhost:3050

Reviewer: ```suggestion
zksync-cli wallet balance \
--address 0x36615Cf349d7F6344891B1e7CA7C72883F5dc049 \
--rpc http://localhost:3050
```

```

Now this address has ETH available on `zk_chain_1` to use for testing.

## Deploying a contract to chain 1

Now that your chain is deployed and your wallet is funded, let's create a template contract and deploy it to `zk_chain_1`:

Move out of your ecosystem folder and initialize a new hardhat project using the `zksync-cli`:

```bash
npx zksync-cli@latest create --template qs-hello-zksync zk-chain-test
cd zk-chain-test
```

Use the same private key for the rich wallet:

```shell
? Private key of the wallet responsible for deploying contracts (optional)

> 0x7726827caac94a7f9e1b160f7ea819f172f7b6f9d2a97f992c38edeab82d4110

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***
```

Author: see related comment above

The main configuration file for `zk_chain_1` can be found in `my_elastic_chain/chains/zk_chain_1/ZkStack.yaml`.
It contains the most basic configurations for the chain.

Inside `my_elastic_chain/chains/zk_chain_1/configs`, you can find six more configuration files:

1. `contracts.yaml`: configurations for all the L1 & L2 contracts.
1. `external_node.yaml`: configurations for the chain's node server.
1. `general.yaml`: general configurations.
1. `genesis.yaml`: chain specific configurations with parameters that were used during genesis.
1. `secrets.yaml`: secrets that are individual for every chain.
1. `wallets.yaml`: all wallets that you are using for this chain.

::callout{icon="i-heroicons-light-bulb"}
Never commit your private keys or sensitive secrets to a public repository!
::

### Starting the chain server

The last step here is to start a server for `zk_chain_1`:

```bash
zk_inception server
```

With this, your L1 chain should be running at port `8545`, and the `zk_chain_1` node should be running at port `3050`.

## Funding a wallet on your chain

Because you chose to use a local reth node for your L1 and selected ETH as the base asset,

> you have access to several rich wallets on the L1 that you can use to bridge ETH to `zk_chain_1`.

Reviewer 2: Probably we should mentioned somewhere to never ever use this wallets in production, because they are generated from 1 well known seed phrase

---
title: Getting Started with ZK Chains
description: Create and run your first ZK chain.
---

This tutorial shows you how to use the `zk_inception` CLI to run an Elastic Chain ecosystem and custom ZK chain locally:

- You'll set up a local **Elastic Chain ecosystem**
- You'll create a standard **ZK chain** and deploy a smart contract to it
- You'll create a second ZK chain that uses a **custom  ERC20 base token**

## Prerequisites

- Make sure your machine satisfies the [system
  requirements](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-compiler-solidity/tree/main#system-requirements).
- If you aren't already familiar with deploying smart contracts on ZKsync Era, please  refer to the first section of the [quickstart tutorial](https://docs.zksync.io/build/start-coding/quick-start/deploy-your-first-contract).
- For background on the Elastic Chain or ZK chains, read the [ZK chains](https://docs.zksync.io/zk-stack/concepts/zk-chains) section in our docs.

> - Install the dependencies for the `zksync-era` repo by following the instructions [here](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/blob/main/docs/guides/setup-dev.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Install the dependencies for the `zksync-era` repo by following the instructions in the matter-labs/zksync-era project's [Setup dev guide](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/blob/main/docs/guides/setup-dev.md)
```

(you can skip the "Environment" section).

::callout{icon="i-heroicons-light-bulb"}
If you previously have `foundry-zksync` installed,
reinstall the normal version of [foundry](https://book.getfoundry.sh/getting-started/installation) for this tutorial.
::

## Setting up the Elastic Chain ecosystem

An Elastic Chain ecosystem is, in short, a system to manage multiple ZK chains.
The vision for the Elastic Chain is an ever-expanding network of ZK rollups, secured by math and natively interoperable under a uniform, intuitive UX.
New chains can be registered to the ecosystem to scale applications and communities as needed, making it "elastic".

There are two components needed for running a ZK chain locally:

1. An Elastic Chain ecosystem to manage different chains

> 2. A chain deployed within the ecosystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. At least one chain deployed within the ecosystem
```

To setup both of these components, use the `zk_inception` CLI.
To install the CLI globally, run this command in your root folder.
You can use `cargo` to install the CLI with the command below:

```bash
cargo install --git https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/ \
--locked zk_inception --force
```

::callout{icon="i-heroicons-light-bulb"}
You can find a full reference for the `zk_inception` CLI in the [`zksync-era` repo](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/tree/main/zk_toolbox/crates/zk_inception).
::

Once you have that installed, the first step is to create a new ecosystem with the `ecosystem create` command.
Move to a directory where you want your ecosystem folder to be, and run the command below to generate an ecosystem folder.

```bash
zk_inception ecosystem create
```

::callout{icon="i-heroicons-light-bulb"}

> Make sure to have the Docker daemon running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure Docker is running on your machine.
```

I think it's better to refer to Docker via the Docker Desktop, even their guides focus on running via their app.
